Programming_Rust/chapter_1.md, before:

# Systems programmers can have nice things

"Systems programmers can have nice things" is a phrase often used to describe the benefits of using the Rust programming language for systems programming tasks. Rust is a programming language that was designed to be safe, concurrent, and fast, making it well-suited for use in systems programming contexts.

One of the key features of Rust that makes it well-suited for systems programming is its emphasis on safety. Rust uses a type system that is statically checked at compile time, which helps to prevent common programming errors such as null or dangling pointer references. This can help to reduce the number of bugs in systems-level code, which can be especially important when dealing with low-level hardware interactions or resource-constrained environments.

Another key feature of Rust is its support for concurrent programming. Rust has a built-in concurrency model that is based on the idea of "ownership" and "borrowing," which allows for safe, concurrent execution of code. This can be especially useful for systems programming tasks, where concurrency is often a key concern.

Finally, Rust is designed to be fast, with a focus on performance and efficiency. Rust code is often as fast as equivalent code written in languages like C or C++, making it a good choice for high-performance systems programming tasks.

Overall, Rust is a powerful and flexible language that is well-suited for a wide range of systems programming tasks. Its emphasis on safety, concurrency, and performance make it an attractive choice for many systems programmers.

Here is some code in C:

```c
int main(int argc, char **argv) {
    unsigned long a[1];
    a[3] = 0x7ffff7b36cebUL;
    return 0;
}
```

- This code defines an array `a` of size `1` and attempts to assign a value to the fourth element of the array, which is _out of bounds_. Accessing array elements outside of the bounds of the array can lead to **undefined behavior** and may result in a segmentation fault or other runtime error.

Here is the equivalent code in Rust:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut a: [u64; 1] = [0; 1];
    a[3] = 0x7ffff7b36cebu64;
}
```

- Like in C, this code defines an array `a` of size `1` and attempts to assign a value to the fourth element of the array, which is out of bounds. In Rust, this will result in a runtime panic and the program will **terminate**.

## Comparison between C and Rust:

- One major difference between Rust and C is the level of type safety and memory safety provided by each language. C is a relatively low-level language that does not have a strong type system and does not perform any runtime checking of memory accesses. This can make it prone to certain types of bugs, such as null or dangling pointer references, which can be difficult to detect and debug. In contrast, Rust has a statically-typed, borrow-checked type system that is designed to prevent these types of errors. As a result, Rust code is often considered to be safer and more robust than equivalent C code.

- Another difference between the two languages is their support for concurrency. C does not have any built-in support for concurrency, so developers must use external libraries or manually implement concurrency mechanisms such as mutexes and semaphores. Rust, on the other hand, has a built-in concurrency model based on the idea of "ownership" and "borrowing," which allows for safe, concurrent execution of code.

- Finally, Rust and C differ in terms of their performance and efficiency. C is generally considered to be a very fast language, with code that is often as fast as or faster than equivalent code written in other languages. Rust is also designed to be fast, with a focus on performance and efficiency, and Rust code is often as fast as or faster than equivalent C code.

Here is the summary between C and Rust:

| Feature       | Rust     | C                                  |
| ------------- | -------- | ---------------------------------- |
| Type safety   | Strong   | Weak                               |
| Memory safety | Strong   | Weak                               |
| Concurrency   | Built-in | None (external libraries required) |
| Performance   | Fast     | Fast                               |

## Rust Shoulders the Load

Stuxnet was a sophisticated computer worm that was discovered in 2010 and is believed to have been developed by a state-sponsored hacking group. It was specifically designed to target industrial control systems (ICS), such as those used in nuclear facilities, power plants, and other critical infrastructure.

Rust is a programming language that is designed to be fast, safe, and concurrent. It has features such as static typing, ownership and borrowing, and support for concurrency, which can help improve the security and reliability of applications. While Rust cannot directly prevent a cyber attack like Stuxnet, its emphasis on safety and security can make it a good choice for developing applications that need to be resistant to such attacks.

## Parallel Programming Is Tamed

. In C, concurrency is usually implemented using threads, which are units of execution that can run concurrently. C provides a standard library called "pthreads" (POSIX threads) for creating and managing threads. However, C does not provide any built-in mechanisms for synchronizing or communicating between threads, so developers must use other techniques such as mutexes, semaphores, and condition variables to coordinate access to shared resources.

. Rust, on the other hand, has a built-in concurrency model based on lightweight threads that can execute in parallel. It also provides a number of tools and features to help developers write correct and efficient concurrent code, such as ownership and borrowing, channels, and atomic reference counting.

| Feature                              | C                                                              | Rust                                                                                                                                      |
| ------------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Concurrency model                    | Threads (pthreads library)                                     | Built-in concurrency model based on lightweight threads                                                                                   |
| Synchronization mechanisms           | Mutexes, semaphores, condition variables (no built-in support) | Ownership and borrowing, channels, atomic reference counting                                                                              |
| Error prevention                     | None (developers must use explicit synchronization mechanisms) | Ownership and borrowing can help prevent common problems such as race conditions and data races                                           |
| Complexity of concurrent programming | High (developers must use explicit synchronization mechanisms) | Lower (built-in support for concurrency and ownership and borrowing can help prevent common problems and simplify concurrent programming) |

Commit message:

And Yet Rust Is Still Fast

Programming_Rust/chapter_1.md, after:

# Systems programmers can have nice things

"Systems programmers can have nice things" is a phrase often used to describe the benefits of using the Rust programming language for systems programming tasks. Rust is a programming language that was designed to be safe, concurrent, and fast, making it well-suited for use in systems programming contexts.

One of the key features of Rust that makes it well-suited for systems programming is its emphasis on safety. Rust uses a type system that is statically checked at compile time, which helps to prevent common programming errors such as null or dangling pointer references. This can help to reduce the number of bugs in systems-level code, which can be especially important when dealing with low-level hardware interactions or resource-constrained environments.

Another key feature of Rust is its support for concurrent programming. Rust has a built-in concurrency model that is based on the idea of "ownership" and "borrowing," which allows for safe, concurrent execution of code. This can be especially useful for systems programming tasks, where concurrency is often a key concern.

Finally, Rust is designed to be fast, with a focus on performance and efficiency. Rust code is often as fast as equivalent code written in languages like C or C++, making it a good choice for high-performance systems programming tasks.

Overall, Rust is a powerful and flexible language that is well-suited for a wide range of systems programming tasks. Its emphasis on safety, concurrency, and performance make it an attractive choice for many systems programmers.

Here is some code in C:

```c
int main(int argc, char **argv) {
    unsigned long a[1];
    a[3] = 0x7ffff7b36cebUL;
    return 0;
}
```

- This code defines an array `a` of size `1` and attempts to assign a value to the fourth element of the array, which is _out of bounds_. Accessing array elements outside of the bounds of the array can lead to **undefined behavior** and may result in a segmentation fault or other runtime error.

Here is the equivalent code in Rust:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut a: [u64; 1] = [0; 1];
    a[3] = 0x7ffff7b36cebu64;
}
```

- Like in C, this code defines an array `a` of size `1` and attempts to assign a value to the fourth element of the array, which is out of bounds. In Rust, this will result in a runtime panic and the program will **terminate**.

## Comparison between C and Rust:

- One major difference between Rust and C is the level of type safety and memory safety provided by each language. C is a relatively low-level language that does not have a strong type system and does not perform any runtime checking of memory accesses. This can make it prone to certain types of bugs, such as null or dangling pointer references, which can be difficult to detect and debug. In contrast, Rust has a statically-typed, borrow-checked type system that is designed to prevent these types of errors. As a result, Rust code is often considered to be safer and more robust than equivalent C code.

- Another difference between the two languages is their support for concurrency. C does not have any built-in support for concurrency, so developers must use external libraries or manually implement concurrency mechanisms such as mutexes and semaphores. Rust, on the other hand, has a built-in concurrency model based on the idea of "ownership" and "borrowing," which allows for safe, concurrent execution of code.

- Finally, Rust and C differ in terms of their performance and efficiency. C is generally considered to be a very fast language, with code that is often as fast as or faster than equivalent code written in other languages. Rust is also designed to be fast, with a focus on performance and efficiency, and Rust code is often as fast as or faster than equivalent C code.

Here is the summary between C and Rust:

| Feature       | Rust     | C                                  |
| ------------- | -------- | ---------------------------------- |
| Type safety   | Strong   | Weak                               |
| Memory safety | Strong   | Weak                               |
| Concurrency   | Built-in | None (external libraries required) |
| Performance   | Fast     | Fast                               |

## Rust Shoulders the Load

Stuxnet was a sophisticated computer worm that was discovered in 2010 and is believed to have been developed by a state-sponsored hacking group. It was specifically designed to target industrial control systems (ICS), such as those used in nuclear facilities, power plants, and other critical infrastructure.

Rust is a programming language that is designed to be fast, safe, and concurrent. It has features such as static typing, ownership and borrowing, and support for concurrency, which can help improve the security and reliability of applications. While Rust cannot directly prevent a cyber attack like Stuxnet, its emphasis on safety and security can make it a good choice for developing applications that need to be resistant to such attacks.

## Parallel Programming Is Tamed

- In C, concurrency is usually implemented using threads, which are units of execution that can run concurrently. C provides a standard library called "pthreads" (POSIX threads) for creating and managing threads. However, C does not provide any built-in mechanisms for synchronizing or communicating between threads, so developers must use other techniques such as mutexes, semaphores, and condition variables to coordinate access to shared resources.

- Rust, on the other hand, has a built-in concurrency model based on lightweight threads that can execute in parallel. It also provides a number of tools and features to help developers write correct and efficient concurrent code, such as ownership and borrowing, channels, and atomic reference counting.

| Feature                              | C                                                              | Rust                                                                                                                                      |
| ------------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Concurrency model                    | Threads (pthreads library)                                     | Built-in concurrency model based on lightweight threads                                                                                   |
| Synchronization mechanisms           | Mutexes, semaphores, condition variables (no built-in support) | Ownership and borrowing, channels, atomic reference counting                                                                              |
| Error prevention                     | None (developers must use explicit synchronization mechanisms) | Ownership and borrowing can help prevent common problems such as race conditions and data races                                           |
| Complexity of concurrent programming | High (developers must use explicit synchronization mechanisms) | Lower (built-in support for concurrency and ownership and borrowing can help prevent common problems and simplify concurrent programming) |

## And Yet Rust Is Still Fast

Rust is a programming language that is designed to be both safe and fast. It achieves high performance through a variety of techniques, including static typing, low-level control, and aggressive optimization.

| Feature                 | Description                                                                                                                                                 |
| ----------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Static typing           | Rust's static type system allows the compiler to generate more efficient code, as it knows the exact size and layout of all values at compile time.         |
| Low-level control       | Rust provides low-level control through features such as raw pointers and unsafe code, which allows developers to write code that is close to the hardware. |
| Aggressive optimization | Rust's compiler uses techniques such as inlining, constant propagation, and dead code elimination to generate highly efficient machine code.                |

> ### Zero-overhead principle
>
> > The zero-overhead principle is a principle in computer science that states that "what you don't use, you don't pay for." In other words, an implementation should not impose any unnecessary overhead or performance penalties on the programmer.

- In C++, the zero-overhead principle is reflected in the language's support for low-level control and optimization. C++ provides features such as manual memory management, templates, and inline functions, which can help developers write efficient code that is close to the hardware. However, C++ also has a number of features that can potentially introduce overhead, such as virtual functions and exception handling.

- Rust, on the other hand, takes a different approach to the zero-overhead principle. It aims to provide a high-level, safe, and concurrent programming language that is still efficient. Rust achieves this through a combination of static typing, ownership and borrowing, and aggressive optimization. Its static type system and ownership model can help eliminate common sources of overhead, such as null or dangling pointer references, while its aggressive optimizer can help generate efficient machine code.

- Here is a summary of the main ways that C++ and Rust follow the zero-overhead principle:

  | Language | Features                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
  | -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
  | C++      | Low-level control and optimization features such as manual memory management, templates, and inline functions. Some features, such as virtual functions and exception handling, can potentially introduce overhead. |
  | Rust     | Static typing, ownership and borrowing, and aggressive optimization help eliminate common sources of overhead and generate efficient code.                                                                          |
